Gray leaf spot on corn | UMN Extension 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to navigation
 
 
 Skip to main content
 
 
 Skip to footer
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Select Language English Spanish 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 University of Minnesota Extension extension.umn.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Toggle navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Learn About
 
 
 
 Animals and livestock 
 
 
 Community development 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Food, health and nutrition 
 
 
 Fruit and vegetable farming 
 
 
 Home and financial management 
 
 
 Insects 
 
 
 Managing a farm 
 
 
 Natural resources 
 
 
 Parenting and caregiving 
 
 
 Water 
 
 
 Working with youth 
 
 
 Yard and garden 
 
 
 
 
 Courses and events 
 
 
 
 Connect
 
 
 
 Community consultation 
 
 
 Customized education 
 
 
 Give 
 
 
 Regional Partnerships 
 
 
 Rural stress initiative 
 
 
 Volunteer 
 
 
 
 
 4-H 
 
 
 
 About
 
 
 
 About Extension 
 
 
 Global initiatives 
 
 
 Local offices 
 
 
 News and highlights 
 
 
 Careers 
 
 
 Contact us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray leaf spot on corn 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Corn 
 
 
 Corn pest management 
 
 
 Gray leaf spot on corn
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Gray leaf spot is typically the most serious foliar disease of corn in the U.S. corn belt, although other diseases can be more important in areas and years where weather conditions do not favor gray leaf spot. Gray leaf spot requires extended periods of high humidity and warm conditions. It can be confused with other foliar diseases of corn. Symptoms The disease first appears in the form of small, necrotic spots with halos. These usually expand to become rectangular lesions, about 1/8 inch&nbsp;wide by up to 2 inches to 3 inches long and gray to brown in appearance. Mature lesions usually have distinct parallel edges and appear opaque when put up to the light, but the lesions hybrids vary widely in shape and color. Symptoms can sometimes be confused with northern corn leaf spot, although gray leaf spot lesions are usually limited on the sides by veins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conditions and timing that favor disease Conditions that favor infection include moderate to warm temperatures during extended periods (greater than 24 hr) of high humidity (greater than 95 percent) or wet weather. Gray leaf spot is a problem in areas with minimum tillage and corn on corn rotations. In susceptible hybrids, the disease typically develops from silking to maturity. Causal pathogen The pathogen is a fungus called Cercospora zeae-maydis. It's only known host is corn and it overwinters in debris on the soil surface. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Disease management Disease management tactics include using resistant corn hybrids, conventional tillage where appropriate, and crop rotation. Foliar fungicides can be effective if economically warranted. Typically they are only profitable on susceptible inbreds or susceptible hybrids under a combination of high risk conditions with high yield potential, prolonged humid conditions, and evidence of disease development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dean Malvick, Extension pathologist&nbsp; 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reviewed in
 2018
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Corn 
 
 Corn hybrid selection Corn cropping systems Corn planting Growing corn Corn pest management Corn harvest 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Page survey 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 Connect with Extension 
 

 
 
 Contact | 612-624-1222 | [email&#160;protected] 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility 
 
 At Extension, we strive to make our website accessible to all. The
 
 W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1 ,
 level AA, serve as the Web accessibility standards for the
 University of Minnesota. In accordance with federal law, Extension recognizes that English
 is the official language of the United States.
 
 
 This website is available in English and Spanish.
 
 
 

 
 
 Select Language English Spanish 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 ©
 2026 
 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights reserved.
 The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer.
 This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture.
 
 
 
 Report Web Accessibility Issues 
 | 
 Privacy Statement 
 | 
 Staff intranet
