Common rust on corn | UMN Extension 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to navigation
 
 
 Skip to main content
 
 
 Skip to footer
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Select Language English Spanish 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 University of Minnesota Extension extension.umn.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Toggle navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Learn About
 
 
 
 Animals and livestock 
 
 
 Community development 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Food, health and nutrition 
 
 
 Fruit and vegetable farming 
 
 
 Home and financial management 
 
 
 Insects 
 
 
 Managing a farm 
 
 
 Natural resources 
 
 
 Parenting and caregiving 
 
 
 Water 
 
 
 Working with youth 
 
 
 Yard and garden 
 
 
 
 
 Courses and events 
 
 
 
 Connect
 
 
 
 Community consultation 
 
 
 Customized education 
 
 
 Give 
 
 
 Regional Partnerships 
 
 
 Rural stress initiative 
 
 
 Volunteer 
 
 
 
 
 4-H 
 
 
 
 About
 
 
 
 About Extension 
 
 
 Global initiatives 
 
 
 Local offices 
 
 
 News and highlights 
 
 
 Careers 
 
 
 Contact us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Common rust on corn 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Corn 
 
 
 Corn pest management 
 
 
 Common rust on corn
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 Common rust frequently occurs in the northern U.S. in mid to later summer. It rarely reaches levels that cause yield loss in commercial hybrids. It is most problematic during prolonged periods of cool, wet weather. Rust diseases are generally easy to identify by the appearance of brown pustules. Symptoms Common rust produces rust-colored to dark brown, elongated pustules on both leaf surfaces. The pustules contain rust spores (urediniospores) that are cinnamon brown in color. Pustules darken as they age. Leaves, as well as sheaths, can be infected. Under severe conditions leaf chlorosis and death may occur. Common rust can be differentiated from Southern rust by the brown pustules occurring on both top and bottom leaf surfaces with common rust. Conditions and timing that favor disease 

 
 

 
 
 
 The common rust fungus overwinters in the southern U.S. and Mexico. Urediniospores are blown north to the Midwestern Corn Belt in the summer and infection occurs in June or July. Young leaves are most susceptible to infection and pustules are more likely to form after corn silking. The disease favors cool temperatures (60 - 76 degrees F), heavy dews, about six&nbsp;hours of leaf wetness, and relative humidity greater than 95 percent. Temperatures above 80 degrees F suppress disease development and spread. Causal pathogen The pathogen is a rust fungus called Puccinia sorghi. Disease management The best management practice is to use resistant corn hybrids. Fungicides can also be beneficial, especially if applied early when few pustules have appeared on the leaves. 
 
 
 
 
 Dean Malvick, Extension pathologist&nbsp; 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reviewed in
 2018
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crop production 
 
 
 Corn 
 
 Corn hybrid selection Corn cropping systems Corn planting Growing corn Corn pest management Corn harvest 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Page survey 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 Connect with Extension 
 

 
 
 Contact | 612-624-1222 | [email&#160;protected] 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility 
 
 At Extension, we strive to make our website accessible to all. The
 
 W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1 ,
 level AA, serve as the Web accessibility standards for the
 University of Minnesota. In accordance with federal law, Extension recognizes that English
 is the official language of the United States.
 
 
 This website is available in English and Spanish.
 
 
 

 
 
 Select Language English Spanish 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 ©
 2026 
 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights reserved.
 The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer.
 This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture.
 
 
 
 Report Web Accessibility Issues 
 | 
 Privacy Statement 
 | 
 Staff intranet
