Source: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/programs-initiatives/eqip-environmental-quality-incentives/iowa/environmental-quality-incentives

Environmental Quality Incentives Program - Iowa | Natural Resources Conservation Service
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Environmental Quality Incentives Program - Iowa
From weather to pests, each American farmer faces a unique set of challenges. The Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) provides financial and technical assistance to agricultural and forestry producers to address natural resource concerns and deliver environmental benefits.
How It Works
The Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) provides technical and financial assistance to producers to address
natural resource concerns
and deliver environmental benefits such as improved water and air quality, conserved ground and surface water, increased soil health and reduced soil erosion and sedimentation, improved or created wildlife habitat, and mitigation against drought and increasing weather volatility.
This voluntary conservation program helps producers make conservation work for them. Together, NRCS and producers invest in solutions that conserve natural resources for the future while also improving agricultural operations.
Iowa NRCS Implements ACT NOW Application Process in 2023
Resources for Urban and Small Scale Farmer
s
Benefits
Together, NRCS and producers invest in solutions that conserve natural resources for the future while improving agricultural operations. Some of these benefits include:
Reduction of contamination from agricultural sources, such as animal feeding operations.
Efficient utilization of nutrients, reducing input costs and reduction in nonpoint source pollution.
Increased soil health to help mitigate against increasing weather volatility and improved drought resiliency.
How can EQIP help in Iowa?
Targeted EQIP financial assistance is available through general EQIP, and several other initiatives at the local level. These initiatives address priority natural resource concerns on the most vulnerable lands, target conservation assistance in high priority watersheds, or help stimulate the development and adoption of innovation and technology.
In addition to national priorities Iowa has identified the following priorities:
Surface and subsurface water quality related to the presence of excessive nutrients and organics related to livestock production by animal feeding operations on open feedlots
Plant condition and management to protect/improve pastureland, soil erosion control.
Wildlife management to protect at risk wildlife species.
Who is eligible to apply for EQIP?
Agricultural producers and owners of non-industrial private forestland and Tribes are eligible to apply for EQIP. Eligible land includes cropland, rangeland, pastureland, non-industrial private forestland and other farm or ranch lands.
Applicants must:
Control or own eligible land
Comply with
adjusted gross income limitation
(AGI)  provisions
Be in compliance with the
highly erodible land and wetland conservation requirements
Develop an NRCS EQIP plan of operations
Additional restrictions and program requirements may apply. If you decide to work with us, you will receive a one-on-one consultation from a local NRCS conservation planner to evaluate your current management system and conduct an assessment of natural resources on your land. The planner will work with you to develop a
free
conservation plan that addresses the identified resource concerns.
Decision Making Process for EQIP
Once you choose the conservation practices or activities that best fit your needs, and if your application is selected for funding, EQIP offers payments for implementing these practices on your land with the expectation that you will operate while maintaining the practices for the expected lifespan.
Iowa NRCS, through the state technical committee, requested and received input on resource concerns, practices needed to treat the resource concerns, financial incentives and EQIP implementation.
The
State Technical Committee
is a broad-based group of public and private agencies interested in natural resources protection, including agricultural commodity and agribusiness interests, federal, state and local agencies and environmental groups. The committee meets periodically to advise USDA-NRCS on the implementation of conservation programs in Iowa. Local work groups function similarly in each level of the Soil and Water Conservation District.
2026 EQIP Sign-Up
NRCS accepts applications for EQIP on a continuous basis. We announce signup cutoff deadlines as funds become available.
For Fiscal Year 2026, the first application cutoff date for new EQIP contracts is Jan. 15, 2026.
Visit your local USDA Service Center to learn more.
Special EQIP Programs and Initiatives
Iowa Soil Health EQIP Initiative
Source Water Protection (SWP)
Prairie Pothole Water Quality and Wildlife Program
Mississippi River Basin Healthy Watersheds Initiative
Monarch Butterflies Working Lands for Wildlife
National Water Quality Initiative
High Tunnel Initiative
On-Farm Energy Initiative
Organic Initiative
Organic Transition Initiative
FY25 Iowa NRCS Farm Bill Programs At-A-Glance
(927.33 KB)
2024 At-A-Glance Iowa NRCS Program Summary
(1.23 MB)
Fiscal Year 2023 Iowa NRCS Program Summary At A Glance
(1000.13 KB)
Fiscal Year 2022 Iowa NRCS Program Summary Report: At-A-Glance
(907.55 KB)
How to Apply
The best way to learn if EQIP is a good fit for you is by contacting
your local NRCS office
. If you choose to move forward, your local NRCS conservationist will guide you through applying for the program.
EQIP is open to all eligible agricultural producers and submitted applications may be considered or evaluated in multiple funding pool opportunities. Payment rates for conservation practices are reviewed and set each fiscal year.
Each district conservationist working with a local work group has established local resource concerns, practices, and an application ranking process to prioritize applications for funding. Applications for EQIP are accepted on a
continuous basis
. However, each locality has a cutoff date for ranking applications, the first of which was Nov. 22, 2024, for Fiscal Year 2025 applications. NRCS may establish local, minimum ranking cutoff levels for funding selection. Contact your
local NRCS Field Office
for additional information.
EQIP Application Materials
NRCS-CPA-1200 Conservation Program Application
(92.69 KB)
SF1199a Direct Deposit Form
(1.78 MB)
Program Ranking Criteria
(151.95 KB)
EQIP Conservation Practice Lifespan
(106.98 KB)
EQIP Fact Sheets
EQIP Fact Sheet
(190.11 KB)
Chinese EQIP Fact Sheet
(413.45 KB)
Hmong EQIP Fact Sheet
(322.42 KB)
Korean EQIP Fact Sheet
(451.33 KB)
Punjabi EQIP Fact Sheet
(365.51 KB)
Spanish EQIP Fact Sheet
(352.25 KB)
Vietnamese EQIP Fact Sheet
(374.93 KB)
Iowa EQIP Popular Conservation Practices
General Funding
(2 MB)
Confined Livestock Operations
(1.77 MB)
Forestry
(2.36 MB)
Grazing Operations
(2.18 MB)
Additional Information
Apply for Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP)
The Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) provides financial and technical assistance to agricultural producers and non-industrial forest managers.
Learn More
Historically Underserved Farmers and Ranchers
The Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill) includes provisions that address socially disadvantaged, beginning, limited resource, and veteran farmers and ranchers (“historically underserved producers”).
Learn More
Farm Bill
The 2018 Farm Bill was enacted on December 20, 2018. The Farm Bill continues its strong support for conservation efforts of America’s farmers and ranchers through reauthorization and expanded flexibility of NRCS conservation programs.
Learn More
Ready to get started?
Contact your local service center to start your application.
How to Get Assistance
Do you farm or ranch and want to make improvements to the land that you own or lease?
Natural Resources Conservation Service offers technical and financial assistance to help farmers, ranchers and forest landowners.
Print this information
Step 1: Make a Plan
To get started with NRCS, we recommend you stop by your local NRCS field office. We’ll discuss your vision for your land.
NRCS provides landowners with free technical assistance, or advice, for their land. Common technical assistance includes: resource assessment, practice design and resource monitoring. Your conservation planner will help you determine if financial assistance is right for you.
Step 2: Start an Application
We’ll walk you through the application process. To get started on applying for financial assistance, we’ll work with you:
To fill out an AD 1026, which ensures a conservation plan is in place before lands with highly erodible soils are farmed. It also ensures that identified wetland areas are protected.
To meet other eligibility certifications.
Once complete, we’ll work with you on the application, or CPA 1200.
Applications for most programs are accepted on a continuous basis, but they’re considered for funding in different ranking periods. Be sure to ask your local NRCS district conservationist about the deadline for the ranking period to ensure you turn in your application in time.
Step 3: Check your eligibility
As part of the application process, we’ll check to see if you are eligible. To do this, you’ll need to bring:
An official tax ID (Social Security number or an employer ID)
A property deed or lease agreement to show you have control of the property; and
A farm number.
If you don’t have a farm number, you can get one from USDA’s Farm Service Agency. Typically, the local FSA office is located in the same building as the local NRCS office. You only need a farm number if you’re interested in financial assistance.
Step 4: Rank your application
NRCS will take a look at the applications and rank them
according to local resource concerns, the amount of conservation benefits the work will provide and the needs of applicants. View
Application Ranking Dates by State.
Step 5: Implement your plan
If you’re selected, you can choose whether to sign the contract for the work to be done.
Once you sign the contract, you’ll be provided standards and specifications for completing the practice or practices, and then you will have a specified amount of time to implement. Once the work is implemented and inspected, you’ll be paid the rate of compensation for the work if it meets NRCS standards and specifications.
Related Resources
Guides and Instructions
Data and Reports
View All Resources
Guides and Instructions
EQIP Fact Sheet
EQIP Advance Payment Option
View All Guides and Instructions
Data and Reports
RCA Data Viewer
View All Data and Reports