Source: https://www.fsa.usda.gov/resources/beginning-farmers-and-ranchers-loans

Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Loans | Farm Service Agency
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Resources
Find a Program
Loans
Climate-Smart Agriculture and Farm Loan Programs
Emergency Farm Loans
Farm Operating Loans
Farm Ownership Loans
Farm Storage Facility Loan (FSFL) Program
Graze-Out
Guaranteed Farm Loans
Highly Fractionated Indian Land Loan Program (HFIL)
Indian Tribal Land Acquisition Loan Program
Loan Deficiency Payments (LDP)
Marketing Assistance Loans (MAL)
Operating Microloan
Organic Dairy Marketing Assistance Program (ODMAP 2024)
Youth Loans
Conservation
CRP Grasslands
Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP)
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)
Farmable Wetlands Program (FWP)
General CRP
Transition Incentives Program
Water-Saving Commodities (WSC) Program
Disaster Recovery
2023/2024 Supplemental Disaster Assistance
Disaster Set-Aside Program (DSA)
Emergency Assistance for Livestock, Honeybees, and Farm-Raised Fish (ELAP)
Emergency Conservation Program (ECP)
Emergency Forest Restoration Program (EFRP)
Emergency Livestock Relief Program (ELRP)
Emergency Relief Program (ERP)
Livestock Forage Disaster Program (LFP)
Livestock Indemnity Program (LIP)
Milk Loss Program (MLP)
Noninsured Disaster Assistance Program (NAP)
On-Farm Stored Commodity Loss Program (OFSCLP)
Supplemental Disaster Relief Program (SDRP)
Tree Assistance Program (TAP)
Income Support
Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC) & Price Loss Coverage (PLC)
Dairy Indemnity Payment Program (DIPP)
Dairy Margin Coverage Program (DMC)
Emergency Commodity Assistance Program (ECAP)
Farmer Bridge Assistance (FBA) Program
Marketing Assistance for Specialty Crops (MASC)
Organic Certification Cost Share Program (OCCSP)
Reimbursement Transportation Cost Payment (RTCP)
General Programs
Certified Mediation Program (CMP)
Farm Labor Stabilization and Protection Pilot Grant Program
Food Safety Certification for Specialty Crops (FSCSC) Program
Outreach & Education
About Us
Programs
Partner Organization Resources
State Outreach Coordinators
Price Support
Commodity Loans
Commodity Loan Rates
Facility Loan Programs
Loan Deficiency Payments
Price Support Reports
Economic and Policy Analysis
EPAD Reports
Commodity Loan Activity Reports
ELS Cotton Reports
Honey Reports
Peanut Reports
Rice Reports
Upland Cotton Reports
Wool and Mohair Reports
Financial Management Information
Initiatives
Acreage Crop Reporting Streamlining Initiative (ACRSI)
Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Loans
America's next generation of farmers and ranchers are supported through FSA's "Beginning Farmer" direct and
guaranteed loan
programs.
Farm Ownership
loans can provide access to land and capital.
Operating loans
can assist beginning farmers in becoming prosperous and competitive by helping to pay normal operating or family living expenses; open doors to new markets and marketing opportunities; assist with diversifying operations; and so much more. Through the
Microloan program
, beginning farmers and ranchers have an important source of financial assistance during the start-up years.
While FSA is fully committed to all farmers and ranchers, there is a special focus on the particular credit needs of farmers and ranchers who are in their first 10 years of operation. Each year, FSA targets a portion of its lending by setting aside a portion of all loan funds for financing beginning farmer and rancher operations. With the single exception of the Direct Farm Ownership Down Payment Loan, the Beginning Farmer classification is not related to a type of loan program; it references a specific,
targeted funding source
.
Resources
Fact Sheet: Loans for Beginning Farmers and Ranchers
(PDF 1.6 MB)
Direct Loan Making Handbook 3-FLP
(PDF 2.5 MB)
Farm Answers Library
Farm Business Planning
Farmers.gov: Beginning Farmers and Ranchers
Loan Types
Direct Farm Ownership Loan
Direct Farm Operating Loan
Farm Ownership or Farm Operating Microloan
Beginning Farmer and Rancher Frequently Asked Questions
Beginning Farmer Definition
A beginning farmer is defined as one who:
Has not operated a farm or ranch for more than 10 years
Does not own a farm or ranch greater than 30 percent of the average size farm in the county as determined by the most current
Census for Agriculture
at the time the loan application is submitted
Meets the loan eligibility requirements of the program to which he/she is applying -
Farm Operating Loan
,
Farm Ownership Loan
, or
Microloan
Substantially participates in the operation
Farm Acreage Limitations
Here is an example:
Let's say the average size farm for "ABC County" is 94 acres. 30 percent of the average, rounded to the nearest tenth, is 28.2 acres. So, to meet the beginning farmer requirement, a loan applicant may not own more than 28.2 acres when the loan application is submitted.
If the farm crosses county lines and is located in more than 1 county, "ABC County" and "XYZ County," FSA uses the average size farm data for the county where the loan applicant lives. If the loan applicant's house is not located on the farm, then the Agency looks to the data for the county in which the largest portion of the farm is located.
If you are a member of an historically underserved group or a woman farmer, the farm acreage limitation does not apply.
Down Payment Loan
Being a beginning farmer is one of the requirements to be eligible for the Direct Farm Ownership Down Payment Loan. Down Payment loan funds may be used only to partially finance the purchase of a family farm. Loan applicants must contribute a minimum down payment of 5 percent of the purchase price of the farm and the Agency will finance 45 percent to a maximum loan amount of $300,150. The balance of the purchase price not covered by the down payment loan and the loan applicant's down payment may be financed by a
commercial lender
(XLS, 275KB), private lender, a cooperative, or the seller.
Additional Information
We encourage you to contact your
local office or USDA Service Center
to learn more about our programs. You also should be able to find a listing in the telephone directory in the section set aside for governmental/public organizations under the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency. Our local FSA office staffs are happy to help you.